Native Workbench 0.3 — paired-end small-variant teaching workflow
Protocol revision: 1; 2026-10-02

Scope
This is an explicit, reproducible teaching workflow for one sample and one pair
of four-line FASTQ files (plain or gzip compressed). It runs the same published algorithms
locally through pinned native/portable executables. It is not an implementation
of an unseen university practical, a truth assessment of the yeast sample, or
a clinically validated variant-calling protocol. Basic FASTQ statistics are
provided; these do not replace a complete sequencing-quality investigation.
The bundled tools are seqtk 1.4-r122, minimap2 2.28-r1209, SAMtools 1.24 and
BCFtools 1.24 with HTSlib 1.24. Refer to the pack manifest and build provenance
for exact executable hashes and portability-feature limitations.

User choices
Select reads 1, reads 2, the matching reference FASTA, a sample identifier,
ploidy (1 or 2), and an output location. Diploid is an explicit teaching default,
not an inferred property of this yeast sample. A single selected ploidy applies
to all contigs throughout that run; this release has no contig-specific ploidy
model in the pipeline form.
Mitochondrial copy number and mixed allele fractions need separate biological
interpretation; uniform diploid nuclear calling does not establish a correct
mitochondrial model. The supplied Mito:1-85779 interval is not silently applied.

The two supplied lanes may be validated separately with distinct read-group
IDs. Treat them as lanes of the same sample only after confirming the sample
and library relationship. Combining lanes requires distinct RG IDs with the
same confirmed SM and LB, followed by joint coordinate sorting and duplicate
marking. It is not valid to run mate 1 and mate 2 as independent single-end jobs.

Inputs and storage
Keep selected inputs unchanged. Copy the FASTA into the new run directory as
reference.fa before faidx, because faidx creates a neighbouring .fai file.
Keep all temporary files, logs, intermediates and indexes inside that directory.
Do not reuse pre-existing output paths. Record input and executable SHA-256,
pack versions, every argv array, settings, exit status and output hashes.
Exit success alone does not establish a scientifically correct output.

Commands (schematic; the runner passes argv directly, without a shell)
1. seqtk fqchk R1 > reads1.qc.txt
   seqtk fqchk R2 > reads2.qc.txt
   The validation suite additionally checks equal record counts and matching
   mate names. The current GUI pack profiles each file but does not provide a
   complete cross-file mate-name audit; select matching mates in the same order.
2. minimap2 -a -x sr -t 2 -R "@RG\tID:lane1\tSM:sample\tLB:library1\tPL:ILLUMINA"
      reference.fa R1 R2 > alignment.sam
3. samtools sort -n -m 256M -o namesorted.bam alignment.sam
4. samtools fixmate -m namesorted.bam fixmate.bam
5. samtools sort -m 256M -o coordinates.bam fixmate.bam
6. samtools markdup -s -f duplicates.txt coordinates.bam alignment.marked.bam
7. samtools index -c alignment.marked.bam
   samtools quickcheck -v alignment.marked.bam
   samtools flagstat alignment.marked.bam > flagstat.txt
   samtools stats alignment.marked.bam > alignment.stats.txt
8. samtools faidx reference.fa
9. bcftools mpileup -f reference.fa -a FORMAT/DP,FORMAT/AD
      -q 20 -Q 20 -d 1000 -Ob -o pileup.bcf alignment.marked.bam
10. bcftools call -m -v --ploidy 2 -Ob -o calls.bcf pileup.bcf
11. bcftools norm -f reference.fa -m -any -Ob -o normalized.bcf calls.bcf
12. bcftools filter -s LowQual -e "QUAL<20 || FORMAT/DP<5"
      -Oz -o variants.vcf.gz normalized.bcf
13. bcftools index --csi variants.vcf.gz
    bcftools stats variants.vcf.gz > variant.stats.txt

The RG argument contains literal backslash-t sequences for minimap2 to expand.
Namesort supplies adjacent mate records for fixmate. Fixmate supplies the MC
and ms tags required by markdup. Markdup flags duplicates, preserving them in
the BAM; the pileup default excludes duplicate, unmapped, secondary and
QC-failed reads. The paired-end overlap handling and BAQ defaults are retained.
No automatic adapter removal, quality trimming, recalibration or annotation is
claimed. Adapters supplied with a dataset alone do not specify a trimming plan.

The mapping-quality 20, base-quality 20, maximum depth 1000, QUAL 20 and depth 5
values are visible teaching settings, not universal accuracy recommendations.
Maximum pileup depth is per input file and can cap deep loci. LowQual is a soft
FILTER label: failing records remain in the VCF for inspection. Absence of a
variant record is not proof of a callable reference genotype. Normalization
checks REF alleles and left-aligns indels; splitting multiallelic sites changes
their representation. CSI indexing is used for BAM and compressed VCF.
The thread setting controls minimap2 mapping workers. SAMtools uses its
single-thread default in this release. A nonzero SAMtools -@ exposed an HTSlib
thread-pool compatibility failure with the pinned Cosmopolitan build (a
recursive-mutex condition-variable panic). Keep those additional compression
workers disabled until that separate compatibility issue is fixed and tested.
The minimap2 worker count is not a universal whole-process CPU cap.

Validation contract
The Python validation program generates a deterministic diploid fixture with
two SNPs, one insertion, one deletion, a heterozygous site and explicit duplicate
pairs. It requires exact normalized alleles and genotypes and duplicate flags.
It independently validates FASTQ counts and mate IDs. It then executes the same
complete pipeline through native Linux and portable binaries on each supplied
yeast lane. Both decoded BAMs retain all mandatory fields and every optional
tag. Ordered comparisons omit only @PG header lines; a separately reported
canonical multiset digest ignores record/tag ordering but drops no record data.
VCF comparison retains every data field and schema/sample header, omitting only
the source-reference path and tool command/version/date metadata. Compression
bytes and physical index layout are not biological equivalence criteria.
An indexed BAM-region count must equal its streaming count; an indexed VCF
query must equal its sequential counterpart. Original input hashes are checked
again at completion. A failed comparison is preserved and reported.

Success on real data establishes output concordance for these specific builds,
settings and files. It does not measure sensitivity or specificity on the yeast
sample without a trusted truth set. Linux execution of portable code does not
replace a Windows end-to-end check. The tiny fixture is a regression check,
not a broad caller evaluation or a performance benchmark.

Primary references reviewed 2026-10-02
https://github.com/lh3/minimap2
https://www.htslib.org/doc/samtools-sort.html
https://www.htslib.org/doc/samtools-fixmate.html
https://www.htslib.org/doc/samtools-markdup.html
https://www.htslib.org/doc/samtools-faidx.html
https://www.htslib.org/doc/samtools-index.html
https://www.htslib.org/doc/bcftools.html
https://samtools.github.io/bcftools/howtos/variant-calling.html
